in 2023 85% of women are complaining of
menopausal symptoms 10.5% are receiving
treatment or therapy I mean it would be
as if your testicles shoveled up in diet
at 51 that's the equivalent let's get
started Dr Mary CLA Haver renowned
menopause expert with more than 2
million followers helping countless
women through their menopause
experiences menopause is inevitable
suffering is not but a woman is more
likely to be prescribed an
anti-depressant for her menopause than
hormone therapy women by the thousands
are like oh my God I had no idea that's
when I realized no one's talking about
this so here's their laundry list of
symptoms we've categorized about 70 so
there's brain fog changes in her sexual
function weight gain but here's the
scary things and the studies have been
done we see either a new onset or
worsening of depression anxiety bipolar
ADHD risk for cardiovascular disease and
diabetes increases recurrent urinary
tract infections which is a major cause
of death for women they're suffering in
silence and I was one of those women I
want to see my grandkids one day I want
to watch these women I've raised grow up
and you know be the women they're meant
to be and that choice might get taken
away from me if I'm not
careful but there's lots of things that
we can do for example we see a dramatic
loss of muscle mass focus on strength
training this is going to determine your
longevity as you age strength over
skinny what about your diet I developed
a program for my patients and it's not
rocket science
it's whether you're a man or a woman
menopause is going to affect you because
it's going to affect 50% of our society
and there is
1.2 billion women being affected by
menopause right now and whether you're a
man or a woman most of us don't have the
answers how do we help how do we talk
about it what is it how does it affect
the human body if you're in a
relationship with a woman that's in per
menopause which can start at 30 up to a
woman that is currently going through
menopause in her 40s or 50s or 60s what
should you do to support her what can
she do to support herself this subject
of menopause has exploded in public
conversation thankfully but there's
still so many unanswered questions and
that's why today I invited one of the
leading voices on menopause globally
onto my show even as a man that won't go
through menopause myself but has a
partner and a mom that certainly will
there's something that everyone can
learn from this and I implore all men
who maybe clicked on this episode or
were sent this link to listen please
just listen because you can learn
something too and for everybody new to
this channel can you do me a favor if
you like what we do here you like the
guests we have on and you like the show
that we bring to you can you hit the
Subscribe button it is the single thing
and the only thing I'll ever ask you you
I would love you to join us on this
journey and if you do I will repay you
and that is a promise do we have a deal
thank
[Music]
you Dr Mary CLA Haver why' you do what
you
do you know I started out in
medicine the way most people do I wanted
to help people and in our training in
school we get to have a little taste of
all the different Specialties and my
very last rotation in my third year was
OBGYN and I really liked surgery I
really liked some of the surgical sub
Specialties so I thought that would be
my path but then when I delivered my
first baby and all that Rush of emotion
and dopamine and how beautiful that
whole process was I knew that that was
going to be my calling and so I did the
traditional four-year residency and
loved it and really did well and went
into private practice um after about
three years of doing the Private
Practice route I realized I missed being
an academics I wanted that ability to do
research and be around students and
teach as well as take care of patients
so I went back on his faculty and
everything was going great I was very
successful I was you know doing psmears
and babies and birth control and all the
things the traditional OB gen does and
then I was aging as my patients were
aging too and when I got to my 40s I
realized that there was a big gap in my
education and knowledge around menopause
so I started researching most of my
patients were coming in the pain point
was weight gain and they were like I'm
not doing anything different I'm working
out I haven't changed my diet and that
little voice in my head was
like work out more less you know we tend
to move less we tend I was just going
with the script that had been handed to
me for years that calories in calories
out is the only way and you know in
medicine in the US we have very little
background in nutrition we learn nothing
in medical school very little in
residency as far as what nutrition
actually is and how it can affect our
bodies and so I started struggling with
my own menopause my patients were all
struggling and I decided to go back to
school to learn more about nutrition
because I felt that there was a big
piece missing here because this weight
gain was mostly centered around the
midsection and I was learning about
viseral fat and subcutaneous fat and the
differences and what's going on with our
muscle mass and I'm like there's a much
bigger picture here than just calories
in calories out so in my I enrolled at
tulan University in their culinary
medicine program and just my mind was
blown by how much I didn't know as far
as nutrition and inflammation and aging
and and how it all affects but where was
this menopause piece and so I took
everything I learned and I developed a
little program for my patients um which
became the Galviston diet and it really
was just a passion project for me and
then I started talking about it on
social media and realized that as my
social media presence grew and the
conversation got bigger and bigger that
there were so many women suffering
probably the majority of women in
menopause were suffering not just from
weight G pain but from muscular skeletal
issues mental health brain fog you know
skin Changes hair changes nail changes
and I just kept doing deeper and deeper
Dives and realizing no one's talking
about this no one's talking about the
multi-organ system you know failure that
a lot of women are going through and
they're suffering in silence and
Physicians aren't helping we're not
trained and so I thought and my it's
really my kids who I have two daughters
one's 23 she's in medical school right
now and she's um she's actually here
with us and then um the other is 20 and
they were like Mom you've you've got the
social media presence you really need to
use it for good and that's kind of where
that conversation exploded for me on
social media and where I realized by
reading the
comments what a much bigger P you know
what was really happening in the
menopause world and how we need to bring
it to the Forefront for people that
don't understand menopause um they might
think it's that it's a
small issue affecting a small group of
people but how many women are are
affected currently by per menopause
menopause and postmenopause sure so
right now about a third of the female
population of the world is in Perry full
or
postmenopause um you do not it's not
optional all of us go through it and
because we have such individual
expressions of how it affects our bodies
what we know now is that there are
estrogen receptors
in every organ system of our body and
when those levels start declining we see
a very wide variety of a spectrum of of
syndrome where it used to just be
thought it was a few hot flashes and
some night sweats maybe your sleep's
disrupted your genital urinary system is
going to take a hit um your bones are
going to get weaker but what we know now
is how much it's affecting our mental
health our capabilities our skin our
bones our kidneys you know vertigo ttis
frozen shoulder anytime I post about
those on social media the internet
explodes and women by the thousands are
like oh my God I had no idea you know
and just the validation piece was so
huge for them to make because they've
been dismissed for so long and told it's
all in their head and if we think about
from sort of Perry to postmenopause what
is that sort of typical and I know
that's a tricky word to use but what is
the a sort of average typical age range
and then also what is the sort of more
um possible age range so it could start
between this age and this age so in the
US and in most of Europe the average age
of menopause which means one year after
your last menstrual period is
51 par menopause which is when your body
recognizing recognizes there's some
declining estrogen levels and you're
beginning to be symptomatic can start 7
to 10 years before that so normal
menopause is still 45 to 55 MH and so if
you do the math and back that up 7 to 10
years it is completely reasonable for a
35-year-old woman to be begin to
experience some of the symptoms of per
menopause so let's start with what is it
um and I would love you to explain this
to me like I'm a 10-year-old okay
because I'm sure there's a lot of people
that are both men and women that aren't
fle so we're going to talk about gonads
right what's goads gonads are um where
our so in men it's the testes okay and
where you're making your genetic
material to you know where you're making
sperm right and in a female it's going
to be ovaries M her ovaries so the
difference big differences between male
and female and how that process happens
is that males make their genetic
material fresh constantly the minute
they go through puberty until basically
they die unless they have some medical
issue females on the other hand our eggs
develop while we're in utero and our
mothers so while we're in the womb we're
she's five months pregnant with us we
have our maximum eggs that we're ever
going to have and those are meant to
last us until we go through menopause
and so they lay dormant until we go
through puberty and then they wake up
again and we start ovulating so we have
this monthly and a healthy person
cyclical you know hormones rise and EB
and flow with our cycles each month we
have a period you get pregnant you don't
get pregnant the whole process starts
over again well because we're born with
that egg supply through time we're
decreasing the amount and the quality of
those eggs so when a woman hits the age
of
30 um she she is down to about 10% of
the egg supply that she had at Birth and
when she's 40 it's down to about
3% and so and it gets harder and harder
for that EB and flow of the natural
hormones to do its job and we start
seeing fluctuations in her periods and
then organ systems that are beginning to
notice the lack of estrogen estrogen is
a really powerful anti-inflammatory
hormone and most of our body system so
the muscular Skeletor syndrome of
menopause is really starting to be
talked about quite a bit now and we're
looking at things like frozen shoulder
aralas generalized aches and pains and
most Physicians aren't aware of this you
know most know about hot flashes and
night sweats and sleep disruption but
now that we're really opening the
conversation as to how many organ
systems are affected we are seeing
people coming out of the woodwork just
so happy to know that they're not crazy
and they're being validated and what's
happening at these sort of three stages
so so we have the per menopausal stage
which is from what I've understood there
when estrogen levels start to drop right
so we start seeing disruptions in the
force so instead of that nice monthly
estrogen surge with ovulation and then
the progesterone goes up we start the
elongation sometimes or they even get
closer together I call it the zone of
chaos what used to be a very
reproducible dependable system starts
failing so some women will have
irregular periods meaning they're
spacing out they skipping periods other
will have really heavy periods like like
you know hemorrhagic almost um and again
individual um the way the body reacts to
this is very individualized from Patient
to Patient doctors
love something that follows a list a
checklist right you know we have all
these complicated things we have to
learn and we have these checklists but
menopause it's like pinning the tail on
a moving donkey and in per menopause the
it's very very chaotic estrogen surges
then it goes away for a while like a
woman and per menopause can feel
completely fine for a few months
everything goes Haywire then she's fine
again you know and not only is her
estrogen declining her testosterone is
declining as well so we're seeing loss
of muscle mass we're seeing changes in
her sexual function we're seeing
decreased strength you know there's some
some really good studies showing how
testosterone also affects our mental
health and our cognition as well why
does this happen from a sort of like an
evolutionary or so the anthropologist
have looked at this heavily and there's
we're there's only a couple of species
in the world that go through menopause
humans are one there's a species couple
of species of whales and I think they've
now discovered one of the giraffes
species of giraffes can do it but the by
and large most mammals will die while
they're still ovulating you know like
they're not going to go through a
menopause um and so there's something
called the grandmother hypothesis where
there was an evolutionary Advantage for
women to survive if she stopped the
ability to have children at some point
now again you have to temper this with
humans have prolonged their lifespan and
their health span because of modern
medicine so probably when we evolved we
weren't living this long you know a
woman my age was pretty rare I'm 55 and
so you know it it's hard to say I think
we have outlived how we were genetically
built and so we're living longer and
being forced to like deal with the
consequences of that so so then the next
stage is menopause MH and so menopause
itself is really that it's just really
one day in your life it's when you can
throw the hammer down and say I'm never
going to ovulate again I'm done and so
if a woman's over the age of 45 and she
hasn't had a period for a year that's
the definition okay now it gets
confusing because what if she's had a
hysterectomy or doesn't bleed because of
a surgery or an IUD or something well
then we can't use her periods to help
judge and that's where we start doing
blood work to see you know where she is
in her menopause journey and then
postmenopause is the rest of your life
you know the hot flashes might go away
night sweats might go away brain fog
might get better but pretty much
everything else is going to continue to
progress in a very linear fashion until
you die without estrogen replacement to
put it lightly you seem somewhat
dissatisfied with the current set of
answers that um the medical field but
just Society at Large are offering for
women in the sort of per and post and
menopausal phase of their life and I've
sat here with a lot of women who are
experiencing menopause at one stage or
the other and they also seem to be at a
loss for
answers um I was sat here two days ago
with um a very very successful woman who
you know has all the resources in the
world and she basically and and this is
someone that has all the answers people
come to her because she has has the
answers and the one thing she doesn't
seem to have answers on in her own words
in her life at the moment is menopause
she's rummaging around the internet
Googling things finding contradictory
information and when you sat down you
you you had that same energy like you
feel like women have been dare I say let
down by a system I think the medical
system is letting them down I think
Society is letting them down our our
value and our
worth in medicine you know I came
through this wonderful training program
I'm very proud of what I learned I'm
very proud of the care that I gave
except I was a horrible menopause
provider for probably 15 years I knew
what I knew I relied on my training and
I didn't look outside of the traditional
confines of
training this is such a systemic problem
that I mean I'm going to tell you a
story and this is this is true and it's
embarrassing but I think it needs to be
said because I think it really
highlights how women are treated in
medicine um when I was in training we
had these upper level residents so we
have a hierarchy where you have
different years of training so I was in
the early years maybe my first year and
we had these clinics that we would run
um to take care of patients and so we
have Obstetrics and we have Gynecology
as like divisions in our training so in
Gynecology everything gets lumped
together Pediatrics menopause we had no
specific menopause Clinic I maybe got
six hours of lecture in a four-year
curriculum and so have these women
coming in in midlife and they had
multiple complaints they didn't feel
good they weren't sleeping they were
gaining some weight they were you know
aching they you know just this laundry
list of things that were a little on the
vague side
and my upper levels would say oh gosh
good luck with that you've got a ww on
your hands and that was code we never
wrote that in the chart this was not
taught to me by faculty this was just
kind of a handed down in the lure of
training and a ww was a whiny
woman and that was code and now I know
that she was Perry menopausal suffering
from her list of symptoms of now which
we've categorized about 70
and they're they they were frustrated
because they they didn't think they
could help her now remember the Women's
Health Initiative which was a study that
was supposed to do a lot of good for
women it was originally designed um and
it was stopped in 2002 that was the end
of my training program was 2002 so I'm I
come from one of the last groups of
physicians in the US that were ever
trained in hormone replacement therapy
and then it the rug was pulled out from
under us so the Whi there were mistakes
there was misinformation in the
reporting and there was a
misinterpretation of the results all of
that has been walked back relooked at we
know that for the vast majority of women
hormone replacement therapy is safe and
effective and can give a woman her life
back um if she chooses to take it but
that option has been taken off the table
for the vast majority of women recently
I just saw the numbers 85% of women will
come in with complaining of what we know
now this was in 2023 FDA looked at the
numbers 85% of women are complaining of
menopausal symptoms 10.5% are receiving
treatment or therapy
today is there something in you that
feels somewhat even though you're doctor
somewhat let down by the medical system
um or skeptical about the medical system
for personal reasons I yeah I I'm one of
those women you know I thought I'd be
one of those girlies who would just
Breeze through menopause because I was
thin and I was you know thin meant
healthy I still you know that mentality
was alive and well when I trained and
through most of my practice I I I came
through a very fat phobic you know uh
training and medicine as a as a whole is
very um biased against weight people's
weight and
so now that I've done a deep dive into
nutrition and done a deep dive into
menopause and really sat there and
listened to patients and realized that
you know women who were gaining weight
with menopause you they've done nothing
different they're still exercising
they're eating the same the only thing
that's changed for them is their
hormones and they're being categorically
dismissed at multiple doctor's visits or
Worse here's their laundry list of
symptoms the root cause is menopause but
it's not
recognized and one medication could have
taken care of everything but they're
going to seven eight nine different
Specialists on seven eight nine
different medications to handle each
symptom whereas all they needed was just
to get her hormones back and she would
feel amazing and be able to you know age
the way she should when we talk about
the potential um Health implications of
women that are going through menopause
it's not just ww right it's much more um
that's how she feels though and that's
how she's categorized probably by people
around her but the There's real Health
consequences and life altering Health
consequences lifespan reducing Health
consequences yes what are those so we
know that a woman's r and and the
studies have been done it's not just
aging of course aging plays into this
but when you add in menopause as an
independent risk factor her risk for
cardiovascular disease
increases her risk of diabetes increases
her insulin resistance starts going
haywire immediately your your listeners
and your you know people who watch on
YouTube will be shocked I'm going to say
how many of their cholesterol levels
shot up in their 30s and 40s with no
changes in diet and exercise you know we
see cholesterol levels changing skin
hair teeth the dental changes the inner
ear changes the vertigo is incredible
the frozen shoulder is Legion um whato
frozen shoulder frozen shoulder is an
adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder
joint and it is very common in menopause
so estrogen has this amazing
anti-inflammatory effect especially in
our bones and joints and muscles and
frozen shoulder is super common and it
takes about 2 years of therapy to get it
to break up so the capsule that is right
over the bone where the muscles attach
becomes encapsulated and adhesed and
stuck and so you have to get in there
and break it up and do lots of training
so like a woman wouldn't be able to
reach behind her back to do her bra she
that's one of the things or you go to
take a picture with your girlfriends and
you can't put your arm or you can't lift
your arm above
here that's one of the one of the
studies that I you know presented a lot
of the stuff I do on social I'll present
the studies because I like to I like to
have data and you know I'll get 10,000
comments on oh my God that happened to
me that happened to me that happened to
me not that I can fix it but at least
they know this is something that it's
not your fault you didn't do anything
your just estrogen levels dropped which
led to increasing inflammation in those
joints and is have they seen that
there's a a reduction in lifespan in
women that go through menopause that
aren't treated in a certain way so we
know that um women on HRT have a lower
all cause mortality what's HRT hormone
replacement therapy or menopause hormone
therapy so in the studies that have been
done the observational studies and in
the Whi women who were on
hormones um especially beginning early
in their menopause okay so
estrogen there is a win of opportunity
for reduction of some of this burden of
disease and it is very in starting in
per menopause or within the first 10
years of your menopause that's the sweet
spot for being able to decrease your
risk of diabetes decrease your risk of
cardiovascular disease and dementia when
we go beyond that we start losing those
benefits because estrogen is better at
prevention than cure and so my my
medical school daughter was like Mom I'm
never going to be without estrogen I'm
going to start in Perry menopause like
I'm not going to be one of those women
who's ever off estrogen of course she's
my daughter and listens to me on social
media all day so she's a little biased
but she says why why can't we get to
that point where we have no gaps in our
estrogen Supply we just support all
starting in Perry menopause you know
offer it to all women not all women will
choose it and I support that but you
know we're not having the conversation
and they're not being given the choice
so what age with your daughter would you
advise her to start uh hormone
replacement therapy if she so chooses so
I would say um we start checking levels
and we start looking probably in late
30s certainly if she starts having any
symptoms out of the normal you know
she's living her best life you know
doing all the right things for her
health and all of a sudden she's not
sleeping well or she's having aches and
pains or she's noticing you know changes
in her body most women can tell you
something was wrong I couldn't put my
finger on it but I knew that something
in something in me had changed and I
wasn't responding to things the same way
you know their mental health had changed
or you know the way their gut had
changed their gut health you know just
just there's barely an organ system
that's not affected by this I sometimes
wonder because you know there's the
person going through it and then there's
those around them and they might know
themselves that something's wrong the
person that's going through per
menopause or menopause but the people
around them won't understand typically
what's going on with that person so
they'll they might do their old ww thing
that's you know or they might label them
something else they might misdiagnose it
as another man Health predicament I
remember a woman in my life who went
whose Behavior changed around this age
and I didn't know about per menopause or
menopur it's in hindsight now that I
look back and go oh my God everyone
around this person thought they had
bipolar or something right I mean it it
it's probably contributing to divorce
rates maybe in a good way you know at
this time I I one of the positive things
I see about menopause is that when women
are cutting the things in their life
that don't make sense anymore they're
not putting up with you know as a
society we tend to take on everyone's
burden and um you know take on the
emotional labor in a lot of
relationships take on the organizational
labor and I see because they're
struggling so much with just staying
afloat they're able to just quickly say
no I'm not doing this anymore you know
you need to pick up whichever
relationship they're in you you need to
pick up your your end of the bargain
here you know I can't do all of the
organizational labor the emotional labor
and I've I have a patient who's a
divorce attorney and she said I really
think a significant percentage is of
this divorce is menopause and either
they're prioritizing what's important to
them or they're not getting the support
that they need
and how can we give them the support
that they need so I think it's important
that we talk about it I encourage every
single patient I have all my followers
on social media tell your story tell
your story to anyone who will listen
tell your daughters tell your nieces
tell your sons tell your loved ones like
make this a normal part of a
conversation so that we see it coming we
understand what might happen and that no
one feels crazy and alone when they're
going through it and then we need to do
a much better job in our medical system
of providing support for these women in
whatever way they need it hormones non-
hormones cognitive behavioral therapy
you know there's lots of things that we
can do not just hormone therapy is not
the Cure All for everything we have to
support the whole toolkit right we have
to prioritize our sleep get the exercise
that we need focus on strength training
when a lot of us in my generation never
did that we were aerobics you know
focused on being thin and small it's
time to be strong you know this muscle
mass that you have is going to determine
your longevity and your functionality as
you age and menopause is you know that
loss of estrogen and testosterone is
tearing our muscle units apart which is
leading to osteoporosis as well I want
to go through that whole to toolkit um
but I also want to just before we move
there understand why women don't
sometimes communicate that they're going
through per menopause or menopause what
is the is there a stigma Associated we
talking about it yeah I think there's
shame and stigma associated with aging
with Fe females aging and then you're
you're layering on this loss of
fertility and in the medical field when
you look at funding in the US for
research studies Women's Health like I
think it's 55 billion the National
Institutes of Health in the US you know
for all research studies and that's
outside of what Pharma is funding and
Women's Health gets about 15 billion and
the majority of that is spent on getting
people pregnant keeping them pregnant
you know and fertility issues menopause
gets I think 15 million Jesus Christ
yeah it's like
0.03% if I did the math correctly
of all F you know are we not as
important as we were when we were
fertile does do our lives not
matter it's ridiculous to me when we can
intervene and help and have give these
women a longer life and a better quality
of life and how many women is that I
know we said it as a fraction earlier on
or a percentage but that's like I think
in your book I read it's 1.2 billion
women by the end of this year yeah and
there's what 47 million new entrance
into the sort of per menopausal
postmenopausal category every year 1.2
billion billion right and H and so many
of them have no education at their
fingertips have nowhere to turn are you
know 85% are going in to their
Healthcare provider's office complaining
help me
and being turned away and leaving with
more questions and answers and only 10%
are even having the discussion for
hormone replacement therapy and then if
they're given it they're so terrified
because of the misrepresentation of the
Women's Health Initiative they're
convinced they're going to get cancer
and that that study's been completely
dismantled and walked back we have good
information that came out of that study
but you know the the pro the the thought
that estrogen causes breast cancer is
the worst thing that came out of that
study because it's not
true the mental health implications as
well I really want to get into the the
hormone replacement therapy and all that
stuff but the mental health um
implications for women do we see an
increase in depression and those and the
consequences of depression I guess
depression anxiety bipolar um the entire
Spectrum ADHD so we see either a new
onset or worsening of disease so I'm
telling my patients or I'm telling
people on social media you may have done
fine and done well with your depression
on your SSRI don't be shocked if it is
no longer working at that level you
either have to increase the dose so no
one right now is advocating for Primary
Therapy of depression to be estrogen
replacement but we do know from the
studies that it is an very powerful
adjunctive tool and that it can be
preventative for new onset depression if
you start in Perry menopause women who
start hormone therapy and per menopause
have a lower incidence of new on set
depression in their menopause suicide
it so I've looked at these numbers and
it CO's kind of skewing things because
we did see increased suicide rates but
we definitely see an uptick uh
especially in Caucasian women not so
much in women of color uh in the US in
the per menopause and menopause time
frame inflammation what is what is
inflammation sure so inflammation um
there's there's it's there's chronic
inflammation and there's acute
inflammation so acute inflammation is
what we need to survive it is the body's
reaction to a foreign Invader basically
or to an injury or an illness so you
twist your ankle right and so we injure
that tissue these uh chemical Messengers
are spread from the injured tissue which
basically tells our immune system sin
blood that way send the the you know
white cells and the red cells and you
know all the cells that are going to
fight and heal this you're going to
swell you're going to have pain that's
going to keep you off of that joint so
that it can heal right so acute
inflammation also happens when we get
viruses and other illnesses chronic
inflammation is this lowgrade kind of
under the radar inflammation that's
happening in the background so
autoimmune disease is a lot of chronic
inflammation but we also see aging
itself you know we can't change the fact
we're aging but menopause dramatically
increases the amount of chronic
inflammation that a female will go
through just based on the lack of
estrogen and testosterone in her body
I'm trying to figure out why the lack of
estrogen um and the droing estrogen
causes inflammation so it turns out
estrogen is a really powerful
anti-inflammatory hormone so we're just
like removing that protective blanket
and now you're you're just aging faster
because of it ah okay so we need to make
sure that we reduce inflammation by any
means necessary and that was the sort of
the one of it was the second component
of the galison diet anti-inflammation
nutrition if I wanted to have a low
inflammation diet you said there about
the sugar is there anything else that
I've got to be aware of or avoid or or
choose in a supermarket sure so I try to
teach the principles in the form of
let's add things in rather than restrict
because then we get into eating
disorders and so what keeping tabs on
your added sugars keeping those less
than 25 but fiber and that's one thing
most people are not paying attention to
how much fiber are you getting in your
diet per day and most women are getting
about 12 grams per day and the minimum
we should be getting is 25 vitamin D is
another huge one about 85% of my
patients and women in menopause are
vitamin D deficient not just low I mean
deficient we are protecting our skin
against sun damage of course we're
staying indoors more we're on our
screens all the time but we're also our
guts changing and our ability to absorb
vitamin D is decreasing so making sure
that you are checking your vitamin D
levels regularly and supplementing when
you need to or eating foods rich in
vitamin D that's another one and does
vitamin D reduce inflammation yes okay
so vitamin D is a it's it's a vitamin
but it's also a hor hormone and it has
multiple functions in the body and so
vitamin D deficiencies are linked to
lots of chronic diseases you're more
likely to have hypertension diabetes
stroke you know all of the top seven of
10 causes of death in women and so
keeping those low it's also mental
health you know lots of vitamin D
receptors in the brain and so you know
first thing I do is check a vitamin D
level on my patients when they come in
so many of my nutrition based or medical
or doctors that I've spoken to on this
show have spoken about five especially
in the last like six months you know
people historically speak a lot about
protein and all these kinds of things
but for some reason everyone seems to be
talking about fiber all of a sudden so
fiber does lots of things for us it
slows down uh the absorption of glucose
into the bloodstream so that keeps our
insulin levels lower over time it feeds
our gut microbiome soluble fiber so
there's two types of fiber they're
soluble and insoluble so insoluble is
what kind of when you mix up a fiber
supplement you see the stuff precipitate
down to the bottom that's the insoluble
fiber that's what pulls water into the
gut and kind of moves things quicker
through the colon soluble fiber
dissolves in water that's the Cloudy
part that is the food for our gut
microbiome that is the Prebiotic you
don't need a Prebiotic if you're getting
enough fiber in your diet per day and so
keeping that gut microbiome fed and
healthy and happy is going to do a
multitude of things like that kind of
data is exploding right now in the
research world as to where the gut
microbiome how to keep it healthy and
what organ system it affects um our our
gut microbes make these things called
oxy butat which are then absorbed into
the bloodstream and and people who have
high levels of oxybate are actually
healthier and have less coronary artery
disease less dementia less less
everything so really nutrition when I
talk about the menopause
toolkit hormone therapy is just one very
small part of the puzzle but nutrition
should always be first like it doesn't
matter how many hormones you take if
you're not covering your your
nutritional basis the way you should and
what are some sort of fiber dense or
fiber rich foods that are in you know
every Supermarket avocado chia seeds
nuts berries your cruciferous vegetables
things that are crunchy that's fiber
that's making the crunch apples you know
um there's so many don't find much fiber
in uh lean meats uh or any so it's going
to be your fruits and veggies and seeds
and nuts asparagus tomato spinach celery
uh asparagus celery yes tomato nuts so
much just think of things that you know
the crunch is usually from the
fiber okay fasting MH I'm a fan it's not
for everyone it's not a great way to
lose weight the data on weight loss is
conflicting at best you can eat a lot of
things that will undo the goodness of
fasting in your eating window if you're
not careful and so um the there's good
data though on neuroinflammation and
fasting and on systemic inflammation and
fasting so so I recommend fasting for
the systemic inflammatory benefits and
we do see some really nice lowering of
insulin levels overall from fasting
there's so many different types of
fasting people talk about so when I'm
teaching fasting to my students or to my
patients I recommend the 168 so that's
where Mark matson's data so that's 16
hours of fasting in a row followed by
about an 8 Hour eating window now for
other you know again it's individualized
some people do with a 14-hour fast you
know a 15 hour fast 16 is just kind of
something to shoot for and if someone's
going to consider incorporating fasting
into their life give yourself about a
six week trial you know don't just try
to go 16 hours without food if you've
never done it before your body will
adapt and so the advice I got and what I
do and what I teach now so I used to
break my fast about 6:00 in the morning
before I exercised so I pushed that
window to 615 and I did that for you
know 3 or 4 days until it felt normal
now natural I wasn't hungry then I moved
it to 6:30 and then I just kept bumping
that window out in 15minute increments
over weeks and by week five I remember
sitting at my desk and I had my lunch
ready to go and I was still at the
hospital at the time and saying oh my
God I made it it's noon and I don't feel
bad you know like so I had just slowly
slowly let my body adapt and adjust and
then I've been fasting gosh since 2015
probably 2014 and um and it's just a
normal natural part of my life I don't
even think about it anymore have you
noticed any effects of that you know I
do so many things yes it's hard to tell
and so it's hard to tell but initially I
do find when I'm fasting the clarity of
my thought is much better I get much
more work done it's when I do my best
research it's when I do my best
communicating with my followers is in
the morning you'll often if you follow
me on social I'm always in my pajamas
with a cup of coffee um while I'm
getting ready for work because I just
get so excited about something I learn
and I want to share it with everyone and
so I do find that once I break my fast
the synapses tend to not work as quickly
for me I was thinking about this too
like an evolutionary lens why fasting
makes sense and why this sort of
narrative that we're meant to have
breakfast lunch and dinner you know
maybe breakfast I don't that's a social
construct there's really not great
science now there are humans that will
do better by eating more meals more
frequently and that's why I say fasting
is not for everyone especially if it
triggers an eating disorder if you have
diabetes or you have you know
hypoglycemia fasting may not be for you
but most people can do it successfully
and so I really encourage people to
experiment with it and see how they do I
was wondering if I always try and think
through like an evolutionary framework
and I was thinking about how in our
hunter gatherer past we would have meals
were not available 24/7 yeah and we
would have needed like a really focused
brain to go out on the hunt so this
explains why when we're like hungry our
brain's working better it almost seems
like there's more I don't know oxygen or
nutrients in the brain the brain tends
to work better using the keton Tes for
fuel than uh glucose though though
glucose is the preferred fuel in the
body you know and um but but when they
did studies they were animal studies so
take this with a grain of salt but you
know and they did their mazes you know
the animals tended to get through the
maze quicker and learn quicker when they
were fasted rather than after they were
fed they were a little lazier ketones
you can also use ketones as an energy
source if you use the keto diet you can
you can um but I think you know when
Matson and and that those researchers
were doing their work their research in
Alzheimer's and Dementia you know there
was no keto diet they were just knowing
that people were utilizing ketones for
fuel which is a normal natural process
we sleep and so we burn through the
glucose in our bloodstream then we burn
up what's in our liver in the you know
glucan Genesis and then it switches to
Fat to burn for fuel and so um now
there's people who like to take
exogenous ketones I've I've never
experimented with that I don't you know
that's I don't have any literature
menopause to support that use and the
third component of the galston diet is
this idea of fuel refocus right so
that's looking at you know
food we're looking at the macro and
micronutrients so I'm really going hard
on fiber and vitamin D and magnesium and
things that we tend to as a gender be
deficient in especially with menopause
so I'm really trying to highlight those
things to make sure instead of counting
calories let's see how much vitamin D
you're getting every day let's see how
much fiber you're getting every day and
is there a certain sort of ratio of
foods that we should be having in terms
of that's I originally developed
Galviston diet for weight loss you know
um but if I had to write it over again
so I went really heavy on fats you know
healthy fats lower on carbohydrates and
20% protein um but I think if you know
doing it again the where I'm counseling
my patients now is I'm going much higher
on protein what I've learned since that
book was written was how important
protein intake is to maintaining muscle
mass I'm also talking a lot about
creatine um and and there's some nice
studies done in in the we call it the
elderly 65y olds and and above which I'm
nine years from that right now and so
and how creatine supplementation just
creatine supplementation on its own well
combined with weightlifting we're seeing
bigger gains in the mopal patient post
menop pulle patient yeah bigger gains in
muscle mass and strength yeah I was
going to ask you about this whole muscle
mass um Point why is muscle mass so sort
of perent to this conversation so what
we're well what we know in menopause is
that you know aging combined with a
menopause we see a dramatic loss of
muscle mass with the menopause process
and so in that first 10 years of
menopause we could lose up to 10
sometimes 15% of our muscle mass and
that muscle mass is going to determine
your resistance to sugars so your
insulin resistance is really tied to
your muscle mass your functionality your
ability to recover from a fall um and
the other thing is what most people
don't understand is the muscular
skeletal unit acts as one so when we
have low muscle mass you are
dramatically increasing your risk of
osteoporosis now right now this might
shock you but
50% of females will have an osteoporotic
fracture before they die and this is
almost completely
preventable what is an osteop paic
fracture so osteoporosis is when we lose
the density of our bones through so
estrogen so all of our life we remodel
our bones right we chew up bone we lay
down new bone and so we reach our
maximum bone density as females at about
age 35 and then it slowly starts to
decline through the aging process and
then when we get to menopause it
dramatically we see it just massive loss
of
bone so this loss of bone makes the bone
weaker and much more likely to fracture
when it when we fall and so if you fall
and break your hip in
menopause 30% of women with surgery will
die in the first
year 70% will die without
surgery and that year is marked by
horrific pain and not being able to move
and just really really miserable people
and so and so much of this is
preventable going on hormone therapy
getting adequate exercise doing the
resistance training eating the protein
adding in the creatine making sure
you're getting enough enough vitamin D
is going to be huge at protecting our my
population from this happening as we age
we can prevent the majority of this I
want to talk specifically then about
this hormone replacement therapy you
mentioned there there's you also
referenced a study previously which sort
of scared people yes the Women's Health
Initiative
yeah and that study suggests Ed that
there was an increase in breast cancer
if someone did hormone replacement
therapy so let's break it down um
originally the study was designed to see
if we knew it from observational studies
was hormone replacement therapy going to
truly be protective for cardiovascular
disease that was the function of the
study in women who took it versus women
who did not we knew from observational
studies that yes they had a much lower
risk of death from cardiovascular
disease and and all cause mortality as
meaning death from many cause as well as
um heart disease in itself okay aosc
orotic heart disease
so but that's observational the way to
prove these things is to do a randomized
controlled study versus placebo so
finally finally this is 1998 women were
getting money like there was a new
female head of the National Institutes
of Health they were funding this study
this was so exciting women were lining
up in droves to sign up for it but
because the endgame was to prove whether
or not it was protective for
cardiovascular disease disease the
average age of the patient was 63 years
old so that they could see if it was
going to affect heart disease because
women tend to get that in their 60s and
70s right so they recruit they Dev
develop two groups we have women with
uteruses and women without women who had
had hysterectomies or were born without
uteruses and so each of them had a
placebo arm and then a medication arm
when you don't have a uterus you don't
absolutely have to have progesterone
when you have a uterus it's required to
give a woman progesterone as well or
progestin as well to protect the lining
of the uterus from the estrogen
unopposed estrogen can cause IND
demetrial cancer but we can negate that
by giving her progesterone you following
me so we have an estrogen only arm and
an estrogen and progesterone arm and
they each have a placebo so off we go
let's take our meds let's take our
Placebo and let's start measuring what
they saw in the estrogen plus
progesterone arm after 2 years was a
very slight increase risk of breast
cancer versus
placebo now you have to understand
there's a difference between absolute
risk and relative risk so the relative
risk went from so the absolute risk went
from four out of a thousand women per
year to five out of a thousand women per
year so one out of a thousand women
treated in the estrogen and progestin
Norm develop breast cancer where over
Placebo that is a 25% relative risk
increase m and that is the that is the
statistic that set the world on fire so
the researchers held a huge press
conference at the Watergate hotel in
DC every major news Outlet this was
before the internet and and announced
that estrogen causes breast cancer now
remember these women were on estrogen
plus the progestin which is called
pra the estrogen only arm continued for
a few more years because the women on
estrogen only not only did they not see
an increased risk of breast cancer they
they had a I think it was a 20% decrease
risk of breast cancer relative of yeah
relative risk yeah and the relative
mortality went down 40% so we think it's
because estrogen feeds a breast cancer
cell but it doesn't cause breast cancer
we our highest levels of estrogen are in
pregnancy and it's so rare to ever be
diagnosed with breast cancer and a
healthy breast cell has estrogen
receptors and all that estrogen receptor
positive means is that that breast
cancer cell went from healthy to cancer
through a mutation but retained its
estrogen receptors and so we can use
those receptors against the cancer cell
to treat the breast cancer so that study
has been walked back multiple Studies
have been done but like the the whole
mindset has not changed myself as an
Oben was still the lowest dose for the
shortest amount of time and only in
women where absolutely nothing else is
helping her hot flashes menopause was
defined by the vasil motor SYM symptoms
that's it you know vaginal estrogen
which is just putting estrogen locally
in the vagina so one of the biggest
things we see in a huge amount of
patients like well over 50% is something
we call genital urinary syndrome of
menopause and it is the bladder the
vagina and all of the tissue in between
all has a lot of estrogen receptors and
we take the estrogen away that tissue
becomes very thin we lose elasticity we
see recurrent urinary tract infection
the most likely treatment to help a
woman in menopause with recurrent
urinary tract infections which is a
major cause of death for women is
vaginal estrogen and it's safe for
everyone even with breast cancer and so
even that option is taken off the table
for so many women who are suffering
needlessly with horrible painful
intercourse dryness you know recurrent
UTI and it's just such a simple thing to
help a woman and fix and they're not
being offered that treatment is vaginal
estrogen the only form of administering
estrogen so we have no so when we look
at hormone replacement therapy we have
um or any medication we have like
steroids is a good way to think of it so
say you have a rash and you go to your
Pharmacy and you pick up a you know
cortisone cream that's that's local
therapy right so vaginal estrogen cream
there's pills there's there's different
ways to put it in the vagina but that's
considered local therapy it's not
absorbed systemically we're just
treating it kind of at the moment
systemic therapy is when it's treating
everything our brains our bones our
general urinary you know from the inside
out and so you can ingest it there's
creams there's patches there's Rings
there's pellets that are now available
there's multiple ways to get this
medication into your
body and what's the most popular form of
administering administering uh hormone
replacement therapy so it depends on the
country so in the UK it tends to be a
gel or a cream which is where most GPS
if you can get one that will follow the
guidelines and prescribe it I think it's
the most easiest pharmacologic option to
get in the UK in the US it tends to be
the patch for the nonoral form we also
have pills available as well there's a
caveat with estrogen pills there's
something whenever we ingest anything
food medication goes into our stomach
into the intestines and then it gets
picked up by the portal hepatic
circulation the liver and so the the
portal vein goes straight to the liver
for processing and when that bump of
estrogen or testosterone typically hits
the liver we see some problems with and
for testosterone it's liver toxicity and
for estrogen we see bumps in our
clotting factor and so you'll see a lot
of women who are terrified of hormone
therapy because of this potential risk
of blood clots they either have a
genetic risk of blood clots or a gene or
they've had a clot in the past but if
they avoid oral estrogen and go with a
non-oral form like the patch or the ring
or or even a pellet then we bypass the
liver and we don't have the increased
risk of clotting are there any other
side effects you know in life there's no
such thing as a of free lunch and so um
it estrogen so we have to look at each
so when we look at hormone replacement
therapy we have our estrogens we have
our androgens which would be
testosterone um DHEA and andrine diione
and then we have our progesterone which
is uh the bioidentical form progesterone
there are synthetic progestin available
but I tend to just prescribe the
progesterone and so each of them has
issues that might happen so with
estrogen you can see headaches so that's
kind of a red flag for us we worry you
can see migraines getting worse so those
are patients you have to be really
careful with going low dose um you can
see unexplained so 40% of patients on
menopausal hormone therapy will have
vaginal bleeding doesn't mean it's a
period we have not woken your ovaries up
they're gone we are just stimulating
that tissue um in the lining of the
uterus and it's bleeding a little bit
it's usually self-limited it can go away
on its own if it persists past several
months we'll get Ultra ounds to make
sure we're not missing a pup or
something there but um it's it's one of
the things I warn my patients about so
things I worry about you know headaches
some women depending on the formulation
so for the patch it has an adhesive
right to get it to stick to your skin
and there's a probably 10% of women will
have some kind of an allergic reaction
to the adhesive so then we have to look
for Alternative forms so thankfully
there are multiple forms on the market
and for patients we have to do some
trial and error to find out not only
which formulation's going to work best
for her but also what dosing is going to
work best for her so if I was a
menopausal woman and I came to you and I
said I need help you get I mean you must
get thousands of messages like that
thousands of messages a week probably
and you know I walked into your practice
where would you start with me so I start
by letting you tell your story I tell my
story and it's a typical story that you
hear right yeah what happens next
symptoms so I will will get blood work
sometimes I'm getting hormones to see if
if I'm not clear where she is in her
journey I may get blood work to help me
Define if she's Perry or postmenopausal
especially if she's had a
hysterectomy um I'll get a lot of blood
work around checking her thyroid a lot
of things look like menopause right so
you know fatigue and night sweats that
might be hypothyroidism weight gain
hypothyroidism autoimmune disease all
this rheumatoid arthritis I want to make
sure I'm not missing something else that
looks a light like Perry menopause so
I'm doing blood work around that
nutrition deficiencies vitamin D um
basic labs for her blood count and her
electrolytes I'm I'm doing this full
panel okay but then I'm beginning to
treat immediately and so we have a
discussion around her sexual Wellness is
she struggling with desire then we'll
have a discussion around testosterone um
so I'm struggling I've got my desires
gone okay so it's very common so when we
talk about female sexual function
there's kind of five buckets why a woman
would be suffering or not happy okay one
is a relationship disorder and no amount
of medication really helps with that so
we want to make sure she's in a good
place with her relationship supportive
partner all that so we we have a
discussion about that then there's an
arousal disorder where that's what most
men are treated for when they talk about
libido issues it's really nothing's
wrong here they're struggling to
maintain an erection and so we use
Viagra and those type of medications for
that for so if a woman has an arousal
disorder vaginal Viagra can be helpful
for that so we we talk about that we
talk about orgasmic disorders some women
have NE about 10% of women will never
have an orgasm in their
life imagine if that was 10% of men I
think it would be a National Emergency I
think there would be you know we would
divert military funding in the US to get
this fixed and it's just something we
don't talk about or offer much help and
so then that leaves desire so most women
who are in Secure relationships love
their partner miss that part of the
intimacy that they used to have that
desire to initiate that desire yes this
seems like a good idea that goes away
with menopause a lot and so so for those
women testosterone might be helpful or
there's a couple of FDA approved
medications as well Addie and VII and so
we have talks about costs and you know
how to get it prescribed and you know
testosterone there's no FDA approved
option for women so quite often I will
have to cound that medication for them
at a local compounding pharmacy versus
going to uh Dwayne Reed or a CVS or
Walgreens to pick it up using their
insurance so I know that that you're
coming from the ukuk our health systems
you know are a little bit different but
because my reach is so large now I try
to include you know all the different
Health Systems when I'm talking about
your options give me a case study of a
patient that walked into your door and
gosh you know I had okay I had a patient
who came in and uh her name is Michael
and she won't mind me saying it because
we're really good friends and she came
in and typical overweight not sleeping
some brain fog issues some a Jo joints
aching aches and pains all the things
and um sweetest woman absolutely adored
her husband you know like um but was
struggling with desire as well so we
started her you know I developed a
nutrition plan for her she hired a
personal trainer she got to the gym she
got serious about you know M lifting um
she started on hormone therapy and she
is my biggest cheerleader you know on
social because she's constantly she's
lost probably about 60 pounds of body
fat because we get to measure her so in
my clinic I have a inbody scanner where
I can measure muscle mass and visceral
fat so it's not just the number on the
scale I'm able to tell them so she's
probably G gained maybe 10 pounds of
muscle lost a tremendous amount of fat
she feels amazing she has this beautiful
you know she's back to her intimacy
level that she desired so much before
she is absolutely thriving on all
aspects and she's constantly sharing her
studies her her story online so that
other women can learn that they don't
have to suffer as well and she just
can't believe the thing that makes her
angry is that she didn't come sooner and
that she suffered for so long without
looking for help and she couldn't find
it she came from San Antonio which is
about a three and a half hour drive to
come and see me so here's the scary
thing for me or it's honorable I have
patient so I have this menopause Clinic
I started two years ago and I have a
waiting list that's longer than this
wall and women are flying in regularly
to come and see me which is such an
honor and I'm so grateful that they
trust me but it's ridiculous that they
can't find menopause care in their
backyard you know that they have to get
on a plane to come and see me because
they cannot find care wherever they are
so I've started a a a list of providers
on my website that my followers
recommend them where they found good
menopause care they write a testimonial
and we just compile them and we just
look online to make sure it's a real
doctor and they have a phone number that
works you know um and then the the North
American minapa society now called nams
I mean now called the mopa society they
rebranded has a list of certified
providers on their website as well I got
an email sent to me after listening to
one of the episodes on this podcast from
what appears to be a very helpless
husband it was a very very very long
email and they had said that one of the
conversations we'd had on this podcast
about menopause at one point had really
helped them but the key question that
remained for that person was when does a
supporting
partner know how and really at what
point to help because you know no male
partner wants to turn around to their
wife and go I think you've got menopause
and starts diagnosing them but they also
don't want to just sit back and be quiet
I
think you it's usually begins with
something you can't quite put your
finger on she's reacting differently
she's not as resilient as she used to be
she's
not managing situations the same way
and I think once we start taking this
shame and the stigma out him suggesting
that perhaps this is menopause will not
cause her to fly off the handle I think
you know normalizing this conversation
removing the stigma it might make
everyone go oh I mean I didn't realize
it in myself you know thought it was
grief related and and I was like wait
when was my last Peri when was my last
period oh I think I'm in menopause I
mean I was and then I was like oh God
menopause you know even for myself it
was such a negative connotation I had
that Sex in the City episode in my head
when Samantha thought she was in
menopause and how horrible it was for
her and then turns out she wasn't and
everything was better again and I'm like
gosh is this you know first of all I
applaud him him for wanting to try to do
something because so many you think
women don't understand what's going on
and
so one Bravo for wanting to be helpful
two say it with love say it gently let's
and then find a provider or find a
healthcare provider to go in and start
the conversation and I one of my be my
best visits with my patients are when
their Partners come and that the
conversation is held together and it
really opens their minds you know to
what's going on in her body and helps
understand like what we can do
therapeutically what needs to be done at
home this is a special time for her
she's going to need extra help we're
going to get through this you know it
doesn't have to destroy your sexual life
or your relationship or whatever it
definitely can take a toll if left
untreated but you know bless him for
doing it like we talked about a little
bit earlier you know there's probably a
fair amount of dissolutions of
relationships because no one's talking
about this process and what it could do
to someone this might be a really stupid
question um but I
know I'm no uh I ask a lot of stupid
questions Dem men go through anything
like this so there's a lot of debate
about menopause um the short answer is
not really we
see men's testosterone levels Peak at
about age 19 no shocker there and then
this very slow kind of downtick until
they stabilize at about age 35 to 40 and
then they stay stable for the rest of
their lives but there's a difference
between in there's a big variation from
man to man where the curve the shape of
the curve looks the same but as far as
normal men's range is from 236 to about
a thousand so there's a big you know
man-to-man variation and there is a lot
of men who are supplementing when they
come in on the low in and they're
feeling a lot better now this is not my
area of expertise this is not you know I
just read a lot of This research you
know on testosterone and men are
included in it and so they are finding
that they are having better cognition
feeling better having more energy Etc
but there is no manop pause their
testicles don't stop working I mean it
would be as if your testicles shriveled
up and died at 51 that's the
equivalent gosh
I do have to say at the start of this
conversation when you said if that was
happening to men the reaction would be
different I have to say I think I agree
I think that because it's one side of
the population I think it's kind of been
overlooked over the last 10 20 30 years
um but if it was and Men or both genders
I think it would be a different response
and so much of what women were going
through a menopause were dismissed as
psychological and really had multiple
times in their life you know it's all in
her head we never said it's all in his
head that's not a thing on the warts you
know it's all in her head was very much
alive and well in my training and a long
a lot of my practice I I find myself now
even having to pull myself back a little
bit just because that was ingrained so
much to always look for the
psychological reason I mean women a
woman right now in 2023 is more likely
to be prescribed an anti-depressant for
her
menopause than hormone
therapy multiple reasons for that the
way we were trained the way we were
taught to to approach a woman's medical
issues and also the fear unfounded fear
around the women's health initiative and
what it did to you know Physicians
feeling confident about prescribing
hormone therapy is there anything else
that you do on a day-to-day basis in
your life that
um we haven't talked about yet is is
there any sort of apps or tools so I
really like headspace I know there's
some good meditation apps I really
thought meditation was woow woo and
not anything that you know I I would
just sit there and and my brain would be
bouncing all over the place but once I
went through menopause and suffered so
horribly from the mental side effects
and the death you know all this
happening at once uh to me with my
brother's death aging parents teenage
girls in the house you know and realize
something's got to give and so I hired
like a counselor you I went to therapy
and she recommended um getting an app to
help guide me through meditation and
that has really turned the needle for me
really yeah how you know carving out
that it's just five or 10 minutes in the
morning
to think of what I'm grateful for focus
on that gratitude you know and I love
teaching that to patients and to my
followers of of really putting yourself
first you know the thought of you have
to put your own oxygen mask on first
before you can go take care of your
family and all the other things on your
plate and just giving my brain that time
to just relax and let it flow and just
let the thoughts you know and just focus
on on me for that that's really made a
huge difference for me what role does
sleep play in all of this so sleep
disruption is massive massive massive
in per menopause and menopause and when
we don't sleep we see everything I tell
patients if you're not that's the thing
we need to work on first we need to get
you sleeping because nothing's going to
work until your body is able to restore
itself that's when we that's when we
build muscle that's when you know our
our brain resets that's when our our
whole body you know and if you're having
disrupted
sleep and you're waking up at 3: in the
morning and your brain is raised say I
mean everything is worse your cortisol
levels spike your insulin resistance
goes up your you know everything gets
worse and so when my patients come in we
focus on sleep first and nutrition
pretty much and if easier said than done
though right sleep if the EST if their
sleep disruption is due to hormones then
it's such an easy fix I just give them
back the water they were drinking and
they sleep again where the struggle is
if someone's never been a good sleeper
then that's probably out of my area of
expertise I'm going to send them to a
sleep medicine specialist one of the
things that we now see a correlation is
a sleep apnea even in a thin patient and
menopause in women we're seeing a big
bump in the sleep apnea rates in women
who are um they don't even have to have
a weight problem and what is sleep apnea
that's when so sleep apnea is when you
stop breathing um or you snore quite a
bit you you see the pallet relaxes and
you were not getting as much oxygen you
know into the body and into the brain
it's a big health risk and what is your
personal sort of exercise regime what
are you do so you know I came from the
long the 20 years of just trying I was
exercising to be smaller MH and now I'm
I'm moving to be stronger and so now I'm
doing resistance training so I have a
treadmill that I set up on an
incline um and I do a lot of Zoom calls
there I do lots of meetings there so
when I'm working from home and and
working on the galison diet or the new
book I'm doing it on my treadmill but at
an incline so I'm really working on my
legs I will wear a weighted vest so that
I'm getting the upper body so I'm doing
this for bone density um I'm doing a lot
more lifting than I ever ever ever did
in my life because I have a body scanner
in my office I have sarcopenia I have a
genetic low I'm very thin individual was
not blessed with a lot of muscle mass
and the fact that I focused on being
thin for so long and that was my social
currency is you know I was thin I was
healthy probably I've lo you know I lost
that that window of opportunity to gain
more muscle easily in my 20s and 30s so
what I what I would would tell my
35-year-old self what I preached to my
daughters is focus on being strong not
small you know muscles strength over
skinny and so the muscle mass that you
develop now is going to serve you so
much more than the lack of fat or this
perceived lack of fat that you think you
need um don't worry about the curves
that you have that's that's natural
that's that's the way you're built let's
get some
muscle and what about your diet so what
my
personal window think you told about
yeah so I tend to um I break my fast at
around noonish typically if I'm hungry
before if I'm traveling or you know on a
plane I I don't do well on a plane
without food and so but on a normal day
when I'm like going to clinic and the
night before is when my diet starts I
will pack up my meals and snacks that
I'm going to take to the office with me
when I see patients and so I know what
I've got I'm doing you know I'm loading
up on protein I'm doing something green
some kind of a green veggie I'm doing
lots of fruit I've got nuts and seeds I
eat nuts and seeds all day long um for
the anti-inflammatory benefits and for
the healthy fats and for the fiber and
so I've got all that so I'll break my
fast at about noon and then between
patients I'm constantly snacking I'm
really focusing on protein for myself I
don't have a weight problem um and so
I'm trying to get stronger and so my
protein needs have really increased and
so I'm sometimes doing a protein bar or
a shake middle of the day um to help
with that and then in the evening now
we're empty nesting so it's just my
husband and I and so he you know we'll
kind of discuss what do we have in the
freezer we'll pull out some salmon or
you know we'll we'll make some I don't
know uh burgers or something and um you
know we try to be protein Centric and
then we're adding in like a beautiful
salad with lots of avocado and
chickpeas um on the side so I think I
covered it all yeah so I'm typically
done eating by 8:00 p.m. um
if it's an office day I'll either
exercise when I get back I'm struggling
to get up I do a lot of great work in
the morning so it's hard for me to get
to the gym and the office so I'll save
my workout for when I get home from work
if you had a megaphone and you could
speak to every woman right now the 1.2
billion that we talked about earlier
that are in that per menopausal or the
menopausal phase or postmenopausal and
you had to communicate one message to
them and I'm actually going to bring in
everybody else as well because although
it's just those women I've mentioned
everyone around them in their life
probably needs to hear s somewhat
similar message so they can play
supporting roles in that individual
struggle what would you say down that
menopause to those women and the the
loved ones so my Mantra is menopause is
inevitable suffering is not but you're
going to have to advocate for yourself
because Society has failed us our
medical system is is built to fail the
menopausal woman and there is good help
out there you're going to have to do the
leg work I've got tons of resources on
my website to help you you know lists of
Articles to print out and hand to your
doctor system you know um uh symptomatic
sheets that you can like keep track
journals that you can hand to your
physician um any way that I can help you
advocate for yourself because I can't be
everyone's doctor but that this is real
you're not
crazy this is happening and there are
lots of things that we can do even non-
hormonal don't feel like if you're not a
candidate for hormone therapy that
you're stuck you know exercise nutrition
other pharmacology stress reduction
sleep it's time to take care of yourself
first so that you can have the best end
of your life that you
deserve in 2023 I launched my very owned
private Equity Fund called flight fund
and since then we've invested in some of
the most promising companies in the
world my objective is to make this the
best performing Fund in Europe with a
focus on high growth companies that I
believe will be the next Europe European
unicorns the current investors in the
fund who have joined me on this journey
are some of Europe's most successful and
Innovative entrepreneurs and I'm excited
to announce that today as a founder of a
company you can pitch your company to us
or if you are an investor you can also
now apply to invest with us head tolight
fund.com to gain an understanding of the
funds Mission the remarkable companies
we proudly support and to get in touch
with me and my team legal disclaimer
flight fund is regulated by the FCA so
please remember that investing in the
fund is for sophisticated investors only
don't invest unless you're prepared to
lose all of the money you invest this is
a high-risk investment and you are
unlikely to be protected if something
goes wrong there is no guarantee that
the investment objectives will be
achieved and as with all private Equity
Investments all of the investment
capital is at risk this communication is
for information purposes only and should
not to be taken as investment advice or
a financial promotion as you guys know
I'm a big fan of hu I'm an investor in
the company and they sponsor this
podcast and what I've done for you I put
together what I call the hu Steven
bundle which is a selection of my
favorite products from hu including the
Black Edition salted caramel flavor
which is super high in protein and has
17 servings per container my favorite
heel bottle here which comes with my
bundle and also the brand new and very
exciting hu Complete Nutrition bars this
is chocolate camera you can see from the
empty box in front of me that I've eaten
most of them right me and my team here
if you leave these on the counter for 5
seconds they'll go I'm going to say
something I've never said when hu first
made their bar many many years ago I
tried it and I didn't like it so I've
never talked about it on this podcast
they've spent roughly the last 2 to
three years making a brand new bar which
I absolutely love and that's why I now
talk about it because it's a product
that I eat if you want to order them
yourself and get started on your hu
Journey the link is in the description
below in this podcast episode wherever
you're listening to it there'll be a
stev bundle link and check it out back
to the episode your family have a
history of Health complications and
illnesses right yeah what is that
history but also has that played into
your overarching perspective about
nutrition the Health Care System how it
treats people so my I'm one of eight
children I have six brothers and um my
oldest brother Jeep died when I was 9
years old from acute lymp esthetic
leukemia one of the most common forms of
childhood leukemia now the Cure rate is
95% and but at the time he was put into
remiss
and then he came out of remission in his
late teens and died like a year and a
half later so my childhood was but that
year and a half was all about trying to
save him and everything my family did of
taking him to Memphis which was so far
from Louisiana where I grew up to St
Jude's Hospital the last ditch effort to
try to you know find another
chemotherapy regimen which he failed and
that kind of kind of drove me but you
know it was it was leukemia it was
childhood it was one of those things
fast forward to 20 he died in 2015 so
2010 my brother I knew had HIV and um
had also contracted hepatitis and he was
doing great on his HIV meds um his
counts were good he was healthy
functional he'd been with the same
partner for over 30 years but then his
his liver was getting worse and worse
and worse he also struggled with
alcoholism and so that kind of
combination was really hard to watch and
love him through his choice es you know
and uh he ultimately died in 2015 he had
a stroke and then I was able to go to
his end of life care and the first book
I wrote um I talk about him in the book
because in my rush to deliver his care I
forgot my own and that's when I realized
I was menopausal was through my grief
process I thought I was grieving I
gaslit myself like no no no you're not
sleeping you're you're waking up all
night you're you know upset your mental
health and your brain fog is all because
you're just gri geving his death and
then um my next brother Jude uh was
diagnosed with stage four esophageal
cancer um
shortly uh he was diagnosed when Bob
died and then he survived a few years um
so Bob died at 56 and Jude died at 57
and I'm
55 and I don't you know I know a lot of
it was lifestyle but I still have those
genetics and I'm about to survive three
of my six brothers and um out outli and
I know that these choices that I make
with my nutrition my exercise my sleep
my stress reduction what I call the
menopause toolkit you know and my choice
for HRT are all I want to see my
grandkids one day if if I'm lucky enough
to have any I want to watch these women
I've raised grow up and you know be the
women they're meant to be and that
choice might get taken away from me if
I'm not careful so you know a lot lot of
what I do and why I do it is because I
have to I may not get the
choice what an incredibly important
Mission you're on and what incredible
work you're doing
um because there are as we've talked
about there's been a group of people in
society that haven't have kind of been I
guess disillusioned but they've also
must have felt incredibly isolated in
their experience and what they were
going through and it seems that there's
been a real shift in recent times
towards the conversation around
menopause and hopefully these
conversations if anything at all will
dismantle the stigma which is often the
first sort of all that needs to fall for
people to be able to take action and
have those conversations and just
speaking from my own experience I didn't
really understand what any of this stuff
meant until I started doing this podcast
and I had the first couple of guests on
and then someone said the word menopause
to me and then we started having a
conversation about it and like oh my
gosh like you know maybe when I was in
school someone should have told me about
this phase of life we talk about how to
get a job but it seems to fall off you
know the education system seems to stop
caring once we've had kids almost that's
what we're experiencing here as well
it's really really crazy and the work
you're doing is so unbelievably
necessary and what I love about the way
that you you write and how you educate
people is it so science-based but it's
so accessible at the same time that's
always been my superpower I think is and
I I realized that very quickly in my
career was that I had this Knack of
being able to take something really
complicated and break it down into terms
that people could understand MH that you
know most people would be able to grasp
and walk away from and you have nuance
and empathy which is the necessary
ingredients when you're talking about
subject matter like this where
everyone's symptoms are typically quite
different from one another and they will
have different circumstances we talked
about other you know conditions and
contraindications that might be
complicating things um and you seem to
have a really wonderful empathetic view
on all of those things and an
appreciation everyone's circumstances
entirely different um I'm excited and
I'm really looking forward to having
more conversations like this and
learning more because although I am a
30-year-old man I have a partner that I
love um I have a mother that I love I
have an older sister that I love my
sister is my partner's 30 as well my
sister's 36 my mom is 60 now nearly 60
now I um I challenge you to have this
conversation with her and ask her about
her experience I really applaud all the
and I don't know whether I should say
this or not but I really applaud all the
men that got this far in this
conversation and chose to listen and
have an appreciation that the betterment
of 50% of our population who are going
to go through something is the
betterment of all of us exactly um and
that they also have a role that they can
play in being a support and encouraging
and having the conversations that will
bring down the stigma and and the
suffering of what is currently about 1.
.2 billion people but will be 50% of
people in our population so I highly
recommend everybody goes and checks out
both this book which is the Galveston
diet but also can we pre-order the
upcoming book now yeah it's available
for pre-order wherever you buy books and
you'll think it'll be out in 2024 in for
sure um the latest May the latest May
okay and that's called the new menopause
so you can pre-order that now wherever
wherever um you get your books and
that's the culmination of many decades
of very very hard work so I'm very very
excited to read through that myself and
the Galveston diet book is out now as
well it's been out for a little while um
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest and also
your website's an incredible resource
for all of this all of the things you
talk about right and your social
channels
Etc we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're leaving it for and the
question here
is you get one last
conversation with somebody you love a
child maybe your husband maybe someone
else what you say to them in that
conversation that maybe they haven't
already
had I love
you there's nothing more than
love I've had done
it three times my dad too my um
Bob and Jude were five years apart and
my dad was shortly after Jude you know
I'm watching my parents bar three kids
was a
lot
um just
love thank you you're welcome thank you
so
much quick one I discovered a product
which has changed my life called ate
sleep and they are now a podcast sponsor
you guys have probably figured out by
now that I'm pretty obsessed with
optimizing my health and specifically my
sleep and I think my sleep has been a
bit of a personal revelation for me the
importance of it and how much it
correlates to how I feel every day how
creative I am my mood and everything
that seems to matter to me one of the
controllables to have better sleep is
temperature if the room's too hot you
won't sleep your body needs a certain
temperature to sleep but not only that
it needs that temperature to kind of
fluctuate through the night starting
cool getting colder and then heating up
again which is a reflection of Nature
and how our ancestors would have lived
before Central Heating and duvet and air
conditioning and all this stuff highly
recommend ate sleep I've spoken to the
founder I understand their mission I
believe in it they're good people this
is one of those products where once
you've tried it you never go back go to
eight sleep.com for exclusive holiday
savings and ring in the most wonderful
time of night eight sleep currently
ships within the UK USA Canada and
select countries in the EU and
Australia do you need a podcast to
listen to next we've discovered that
people who liked this episode also tend
to absolutely love another recent
episode we've done so I've linked that
episode in the description below I know
you'll enjoy
[Music]
it